+++
title = "Strengthening Participatory Democracy"
description = "Strengthening Participatory Democracy"
keywords = [""]
+++

The concept of social audit received nationwide acceptance with its inclusion in the MGNREG Act. Efforts have been made to build an institutional architecture to conduct social audits in a systematic manner on the basis of minimum norms. This architecture has advanced possibilities of extending it to other programmes. Parliament and Government through legislations and executive orders, respectively, have mandated social audits of the implementation of National Food Security Act, Persons with Disabilities Act, National Social Assistance Programme, Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana, Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana, Swacch Bharat Mission, Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan etc. The Supreme Court’s directions to conduct social audits in the implementation of Building and other Construction Workers (BoCW) Act and the Juvenile Justice Act has also helped to push the cause of social audits. The Comptroller and Auditor General of India developing Auditing Standards of Social Audit to lay down the minimum standards of the social audit process has also enabled the infusion of norms of independence, credibility and quality in social audits being attempted in different States and schemes. 

SARU has been involved in the conduct of Social Audits of National Food Security Act in collaboration with Department of Food and Civil Supplies, Government of Kerala; Tata Institute for Social Sciences and the State’s Social Audit Unit. The audit was conducted in a low-income residential area in Trivandrum city in Kerala. The audit was able to identify and highlight limitations of digital transparency, emphasizing the need for ongoing citizen education regarding rights and entitlements that is a pre-requisite if the advantages of digital transparency is to be made accessible to the ordinary citizen. A Toolkit/Primer for conduct of Social Audit of NFSA was prepared, and the positive outcomes of the pilot has led to a government decision to carry out social audits in all districts of the state through the State Social Audit Unit. 

Documents to embed:  Kerala 2 
Images: Kerala A 

SARU helped facilitate a pilot social audit of the Destitute Free Kerala Programme of the Govt of Kerala, in collaboration with the Kerala State Social Audit Unit. The Programme is implemented by the State’s Kudambashree network and endeavours to identify “destitute” families through participatory processes and plan projects with the help of local self governments to assist such families. This was the first ever social audit conducted since the inception of this programme in 2004. Based on the successful conclusion of the pilot audit, the State Government has ordered audits to be conducted in other parts of the State too. 

Documents to embed: Kerala 1 
Images: Kerala B 

The Supreme Court in 2019 gave directions to conduct social audits of the Building and other Construction Workers (BoCW) Act, in order to identify limitations in the implementation of the Act that prevented the rightful beneficiaries i.e. construction workers in rural and urban areas, to access social security from the construction cess collected under the Act. SARU worked with civil society organizations and unions such as National Campaign Committee for Central Legislation for Construction Labour (NCC-CL), Aajeevika Bureau, SR Abhiyan, Aasthan Sansthan, Centre for Advocacy and Research, Gramin Samaj Vikas Sansthan (GSVS), Kotada Adivasi Sangthan, Rajasthan Nirman Evum General Mazdoor Union,  in collaboration with the State and Central Governments to pilot social audits of BoCW in Delhi and Rajasthan. The social audits led to uncovering of serious inadequacies in the implementation of the Act such as instances of workers having to pay bribes to get registered as construction workers under the Act; middlemen and E-Mitra operators siphoning off financial benefits accrued to BoCW registered beneficiaries from various schemes; lack of any information with workers about status of their applications; nexus between labour department officials and common service centres registering workers; institutionalized corruption, exclusion of eligible beneficiaries. Upon the successful completion of the audits, a host of corrective measures were set off including cancelling the licences of 45 common service centres, FIRs being filed against those who took bribes from workers and organization of daily camps to register eligible construction workers in the area. Based on the methodology followed in the pilot Social Audit, the Ministry of Labour and Employment, Government of India issued directions to all State Governments to conduct social audits as per the protocol followed in the audit.  

Documents to embed: Rajasthan 1 + Rajasthan 2 + Delhi 1  
Images: Rajasthan A 

Meghalaya is the country’s first State to enact a law that mandates social audits across more than 21 schemes and 11 Line Departments in the State. The Law enables citizens participation in the planning of development, selection of beneficiaries, concurrent monitoring of programmes, the redress of grievances, and audit of works, services, and programmes on an annual basis. In a 6th schedule area like Meghalaya, it potentially provides democratic tribal communities an opportunity to use their traditional strength of community decision making to shape the nature and implementation of development programmes. SARU has collaborated with the State Government and civil society organizations such as Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan (MKSS), Support for Advocacy and Training to Health Initiatives (SATHI), Digital Empowerment Foundation (DEF), National Institute of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj (NIRD&PR), Jan Jagran Shakti Sangathan (JJSS), Population Foundation of India (PFI), Social Audit Unit of Jharkhand and Telengana State and others to conduct pilot social audits; steer trainings and capacity building programmes for social audit resource persons; drafting of rules to guide the implementation of the Law in future; preparation of formats for audit verification and reporting; helping in the institutionalization of the implementation machinery required to be put in place through the law. Engagement with social audits in Meghalaya taught us about how social audits as a process can be re-envisioned to apply to multiple contexts simultaneously and offer itself as a platform for both citizen audit and grievance redress. 
Documents to embed: Meghalaya 1, Meghalaya 2, Meghalaya 3, Meghalaya 4  
Images: Meghalaya A 

In the spirit of trying to embed social audits in emerging areas of relevance, we are attempting to conduct pilot social audits of the District Mineral Foundation Trust (Chhattisgarh), Forest Rights Act (Rajasthan) and Tribal Health Cooperatives (Kerala). Watch this space for more! 

SARU is working with Environics Trust and other campaigns to advocate for and strengthen transparency in the operations of the extractives industry. SARU, in collaboration with other peoples campaigns and networks working in mining affected areas together developed a India Extractives Transparency Charter to lay down minimum principles of transparency and information sharing that should govern the operations of the extractive industry. We continue to work with the member campaigns and seek opportunities to enforce the Charter as and when opportunities arise 
Documents to embed: Charter 1
Images 

***
